It was Sunday 30 June 2019, a balmy summer’s afternoon, and Wil, a 31-year-old software engineer, was lounging on an inflatable airbed outside his house in Clapham, south-west London. He wore pyjamas and drank Polish beer. As he chatted to his housemate in the sunshine, planes on their way to Heathrow airport made their final approach overhead. On his phone, Wil showed his housemate an app that tells users the route and model of any passing plane. He tested the app on one plane, and then held his phone up again, shielding his eyes from the sun and squinting into the sky.
Then he saw something falling. "At first I thought it was a bag," he said. "But after a few seconds it turned into quite a large object, and it was falling fast." Maybe a piece of machinery had fallen from the landing gear, he thought, or a suitcase from the cargo hold. But then he half-remembered an article he had read years before, about people stowing away on planes. He didn’t want to believe it, but as the object got nearer and nearer, it became impossible to deny. "In the last second or two of it falling, I saw limbs," said Wil. "I was convinced that it was a human body."
Wil took a screenshot of the flight app notification, and his housemate called the police to give them the details: Kenya Airways flight KQ 100, a Boeing 787-8 Dreamliner that had left Nairobi’s Jomo Kenyatta International airport eight hours and six minutes earlier, at 9.35am local time. Wil went out on his motorbike, hoping he would "see a bag lying on the road, praying it was just a bag or a coat or something," he said. At one point, he found a rucksack lying in the road, and felt a surge of relief. On closer inspection, it was covered in dust. It couldn’t have fallen from the plane.
"As I went around the next road," recalled Wil, "a police car came screaming past in the opposite direction and very nearly clipped my handlebars. I thought: ‘Oh, my God. It was a human. That’s definitely what this is.’" Wil followed the police car, which led him to Offerton Road, 300 metres away from his home. A whey-faced young man – he looked to be in his 20s or early 30s – stood outside a handsome townhouse, trembling and silent. His name was John Baldock, also a software engineer, and originally from Devon. "He had a million-mile stare," said Wil.
Wil looked through the window, into the garden. The patio was "totally destroyed". He looked at John. "The first thing I said to him was: ‘That was a human, wasn’t it?’ Because I still wasn’t 100%. And he didn’t say anything, but he just looked at me and nodded. And then it hammered down on me, like a weight of bricks."
Wil was right. It was a body. It – he – had plummeted 3,500ft, half-frozen, hitting the ground at 3.38pm. He was the man who fell from the sky. The stowaway.

The Kenya Airways stowaway case would normally have been one for the Metropolitan police’s missing person’s unit, but on the day the call came in, the team was swamped. So DS Paul Graves of the specialist crime unit volunteered. "I thought it was an interesting job," Graves told me when we met last year in his narrow, strip-lit office at Brixton police station.
In his three-decade career as a police officer, Graves had worked on stabbings, shootings, kidnappings and attempted murders. These were exacting cases, and he was well used to media scrutiny, family and friends demanding answers, and witnesses who were reluctant to cooperate. As an experienced senior detective, Graves hoped to identify the fallen man and repatriate his body, but he wasn’t exactly optimistic. "You’d struggle to find anyone who’s optimistic in the police," he chuckled.
When the call came in at 3.39pm, officers sped to Offerton Road, where they spoke to Wil, John and the neighbours. Police contacted Heathrow, which dispatched staff to examine the Kenya Airways plane’s wheel wells, the unpressurised area into which the plane’s landing gear retracts after takeoff. In the wheel wells, there is just about enough space for a person to crouch and evade detection. Inside, staff found a grubby khaki rucksack with the initials MCA written on it.
The rucksack didn’t contain any significant clues: just some bread, a bottle of Fanta, a bottle of water and a pair of trainers. "It was literally about survival: food and water and a pair of shoes," said Graves. But there was also a small amount of Kenyan currency, and the bottle of Fanta was found to have been sold by a Kenyan shop, indicating that the stowaway had almost certainly boarded the plane there. The flight had originally come from Johannesburg to Nairobi, Graves said, so it was helpful to rule out the possibility that the stowaway had smuggled himself on to the plane in South Africa.
At Lambeth mortuary, pathologists took samples of the man’s DNA and copies of his fingerprints, and sent them to the authorities in Kenya. The DNA results came back quickly: no match. Graves was hopeful that he would have better luck with the fingerprints, as many jobs in Kenya require that candidates are fingerprinted. But the stowaway’s fingerprints weren’t on the Kenyan police database, either.
As Graves continued his work, reporters descended on Offerton Road, interviewing neighbours for a deluge of articles that were careful to mention the value of the house that John was renting (£2.3m) and his alma mater (Oxford University). It’s not hard to see why the story drew headlines. Stories of migrants risking their lives to reach Europe were familiar news fixtures. A month earlier, a record number of boats were intercepted in the Channel on a single day, as more than 70 people were picked up by border forces. The previous year, the UN refugee agency estimated that six people died each day attempting to cross the Mediterranean. But these stories had become so familiar that they were often met with apathy. The story of the Kenyan stowaway seemed novel. Here was an anonymous man, travelling from a country where around a third of the population lives on less than $2 a day, who had fallen thousands of feet from the underbelly of a plane into one of the wealthiest postcodes in London. "It’s in your face," said Graves. "The meeting of worlds, at about 200mph."

Stowing away in the wheel well of a passenger jet is, objectively speaking, a suicidally dangerous thing to do. According to the US Federal Aviation Administration, from 1947 to February 2020, 128 people around the world attempted to stow away in this manner. More than 75% of them died. This is not surprising. At every stage, imminent death is all but assured. The stowaway may fall out of the plane as it is taking off, as happened to 14-year-old Keith Sapsford in February 1970, who fell from the wheel well of a Douglas DC-8 travelling from Sydney to Tokyo shortly after takeoff. (Astonishingly, a photographer captured the moment the schoolboy fell from the plane.) If the stowaway survives takeoff, they can be crushed by the landing gear as it retracts into the wheel well. This is how, in July 2011, 23-year-old Cuban stowaway Adonis Guerrero Barrios died above Havana after climbing on to an Airbus A340 bound for Madrid.
If the stowaway avoids being crushed, they will probably die shortly after. Within about 25 minutes of takeoff, most passenger planes reach a cruising altitude of 35,000ft feet. The temperature outside the plane is approximately -54C, although the hydraulic lines used to extend and retract the landing gear emit heat, raising the temperature by as much as 20C. Still, -34C is cold enough to induce fatal hypothermia. The air pressure at cruising altitude is around four times lower than sea level, which means that a person’s lungs cannot draw sufficient oxygen from the air. This will lead to hypoxia, when the blood is not able to supply enough oxygen to the tissues of the body, which can cause heart attacks and brain death. The rapid decrease in air pressure during ascent can also cause decompression sickness – known to divers as the bends – in which gas bubbles form in the body, causing a variety of debilitating conditions, some of them fatal.
If the stowaway somehow survives the journey, they will certainly be unconscious when the plane begins its descent. So when the plane’s landing gear extends on its final approach, usually within five miles of the runway, the stowaway will probably fall from the wheel well to the ground thousands of feet below. This is why the bodies of stowaways are sometimes found in south London, under the Heathrow flight path. Mozambican Carlito Vale, who fell from a British Airways flight in June 2015, was decapitated on impact with the air conditioning unit of an office block in Richmond. Pakistan-born Mohammed Ayaz fell from a British Airways flight in June 2001 and died on impact in a Homebase car park, also in Richmond.
And yet what is truly extraordinary, given the risks involved, is that some stowaways do survive. This is something scientists have trouble explaining, not least because they cannot run experiments simulating what happens to human beings shut into wheel wells at high altitude. "Something happens that we don’t fully understand," said Paulo Alves of the Aerospace Medical Association. Their best guess about how some stowaways cheat death? They hibernate.
Stephen Veronneau, the world’s leading expert on wheel well stowaways, outlined this theory in a 1996 paper for the Federal Aviation Administration. "The person’s core body temperature can fall to 27C [a healthy body temperature is between 36.1C and 37.2C], or even lower. When the plane lands, a gradual rewarming occurs, along with reoxygenation. If the individual is so fortunate as to avoid brain damage or death from the hypoxia and hypothermia, cardiac arrest or failure on rewarming, or severe neurovascular decompression sickness complications, some progressive recovery of consciousness occurs." (Veronneau declined to be interviewed for this piece, but confirmed via email that he still believes the hibernation theory holds true.)
Research on cold-water drowning cases seems to support Veronneau’s theory. In February 2011, 13 Danish teenagers and two teachers were on a boat that capsized in an icy fjord during a school trip. One of the teachers and some of the students were able to swim to shore and alert the authorities. (The other teacher was later found dead in the fjord.) By the time first responders arrived on the scene 103 minutes later, seven of the teenagers were unconscious, floating in -2C water. In the two hours it took for them to be pulled from the fjord and flown to hospital, their hearts stopped beating. They had an average internal body temperature of 18.4C. They were clinically dead, said Dr Michael C Jaeger Wanscher, who treated them.
At Copenhagen’s Rigshospitalet, doctors warmed the teenagers’ blood by 1C every 10 minutes, back up to 36C, using an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation machine, which removes blood from the body, oxygenates it, and then pumps it back into the sedated person’s body. The process means the blood bypasses the heart and lungs, allowing them to heal. After the teenagers were rewarmed, they were transferred to the intensive care unit, where they remained deeply sedated, on ventilators, before being gradually weaned off the machines. All seven regained consciousness. One student experienced severe physical and cognitive damage, and now lives in a residential facility. The other six experienced mild to moderate brain damage, but were able to lead relatively normal lives, eventually returning to school. "They have studied and passed exams, but perhaps at a lower level," Wanscher told me. "They are not precisely like they were before the accident. There is a difference. They also feel it in themselves. They will say: ‘I don’t function like I used to before.’"
When a person is near-frozen, their oxygen and energy needs diminish, making them less susceptible to hypoxia-induced brain damage. When the person is gradually rewarmed, they reawaken, as if from a dream. "We’ve learned beyond any shadow of doubt that this is possible," said Alves. "There is tangible evidence. Some of the stowaway survivors are covered in frost, showing that they truly underwent hypothermia."
To be frozen, and come back to life. It is fantastical. And yet, it seems to be true.

In September 2019, three months after Graves took on the case, he flew to Kenya, hoping to uncover any scrap of information that might help identify the stowaway. He visited slums around the airport. He visited mortuaries, which were full of unclaimed bodies. Officials took him on a tour of Nairobi airport and gave him access to CCTV recordings. They revealed that after the plane landed from South Africa, it was taken to stand 1, where it sat for five hours, before being moved to departure gate 17, where passengers boarded the flight to London. CCTV of the departure gate and runway shows that nobody jumped on the plane as it was taking off and nobody climbed into the undercarriage while it was at gate 17. That means the stowaway almost certainly boarded the plane when it was being held at outer stand 1, where the CCTV coverage was less clear.
How had the stowaway managed to get on the plane? From a physical perspective, this wouldn’t have been hard. Stowaways usually make for the two rear wheel wells, because they are bigger than at the front of the plane. To access the wheel well, you have to shimmy about 6ft up the landing gear – it is covered in struts, making it easy to get a foothold – and crawl into the cavity that the wheels retract into after takeoff.
The hard part would have been gaining access to the aircraft before takeoff. Security at Jomo Kenyatta International was tight. "There was no evidence of any obvious security breaches," said Graves. "All the staff had to use passes to go through secure gates."
Graves knew that a groundworker, baggage handler or cleaner would have access to the plane when it was being cleaned, refuelled and loaded for takeoff. "You’re looking for a low-paid, low-educated person with access to the pan," said David Learmont, consulting editor at the aviation news website FlightGlobal. (The "pan" is a military term for the parking area when an aircraft is on the ground.) "It would be unlikely to be someone like a mechanic, because they’d know that stowing away is not a good way to get a cheap flight, because they wouldn’t get to enjoy the other end." But Kenyan airport authorities insisted to Graves that all their employees were present and accounted for, and that police interviews had found no evidence that staff had assisted the stowaway in accessing the aircraft.
Another possibility was that the stowaway had reached the plane by breaching the outer perimeter of the airfield. In 2014, 15-year-old stowaway Yahya Abdi climbed over a fence at San Jose airport in California and stowed away on a flight to Hawaii. (Abdi survived the flight.) But again, airport officials assured Graves that the perimeter had also been secure. As with all of these claims, he had little choice but to take their word for it. (Jomo Kenyatta airport did not respond to multiple requests for comment for this article.)
The case was befuddling. A man had climbed on to the plane in Nairobi. He had fallen from the sky over London. He was Kenyan. All these things were certain or very nearly so, and yet Graves was no closer to finding his man.
Graves is not the type to be maudlin, but the case did affect him. On the flight to Kenya, there was a moment after takeoff when he heard the crunch of the wheels retracting. He turned to his colleague and winced. "We just looked at each other," he said. It was awful to imagine a person sitting beneath them, alone, cowering in the wheel well. "In my job, you see lots of horrible things: dead bodies and smashed-up people, and you do suffer compassion fatigue, to a degree. But when I heard the noise of the wheels, I thought: oh, blimey. It felt like such a desperate thing to do."
For Graves, the story was always bigger than how the stowaway made it on to the plane. The question was: why? "We saw the aftermath of someone falling from an aeroplane," said Graves. "But for me, the interesting part was, where did the story start?"

Since the earliest days of aviation, there have been stowaways. People from countries including Cuba, South Africa, Kenya, Nigeria, Senegal, the Dominican Republic and China have secretly climbed on to planes in the hope of leaving their old life behind. They abscond for all kinds of reasons: poverty, unhappiness, boredom, despair. Bas Wie, the 12-year-old who stowed away in a Douglas DC-3 from Indonesia to Australia in 1946, was an orphan who worked for food in the kitchens of Kupang airport in West Timor. Abdi, the teenager who flew in the wheel well of a Boeing 767 from California to Hawaii, said he was trying to get back to his mother in Somalia.
Every known wheel well stowaway has been male, although a Cuban woman did ship herself to the US in the pressurised hold of a cargo plane from the Bahamas in 2014. The youngest documented case involved a boy of nine, although the majority of stowaways are adults under 30. Very few stowaway cases involve domestic flights.
Cuba is the most common country of origin for wheel well stowaways, with nine cases since 1947. Armando Socarras Ramirez was the first. In June 1969, when he was 17, Ramirez hid in the right wheel well of a Douglas DC-8 that was due to make the eight-hour flight from Havana to Madrid. Upon landing, the pilot found Ramirez lying under the plane, covered in ice, not breathing. "The doctors in Spain called me the Popsicle!" Ramirez told me recently. He is now 69, a father of four and grandfather of 12, and lives in Virginia.
From the age of 10, Ramirez had wanted to leave Cuba. He got the idea to stow away from his friend Jorge Pérez Blanco, who was a year younger than him. Together, they staked out Havana airport. "The only airline suitable was Iberia," Ramirez said, "because the rest were going to communist countries. If we’d landed there they’d have sent us right back – maybe in the same wheel well!" The Iberia Airlines flight from Madrid landed on a Tuesday morning, refuelled, and departed on Tuesday evening.
On 3 June 1969, Ramirez and Pérez waited outside the perimeter fence. Ramirez carried a rope, a torch and cotton wool to stuff into his ears. As the plane began to taxi towards the runway, they jumped the fence. Pérez started to have second thoughts, and Ramirez half-dragged him to the plane. The engines were roaring madly. They approached from the rear.
Pérez entered the left wheel well, and Ramirez the right. The plane took off. "When the plane got up in the air," he says, "the compartment started opening up to let the wheels come inside. I was hanging on with my fingertips to the edge of the compartment and being blown sideways by the wind." His middle finger later turned black from frostbite and exertion. (Pérez fell out of the plane and was found alive on the runway in Havana, and was later imprisoned by the Cuban government.)
As the wheels came up, Ramirez got a foothold, which stopped him from falling out of the plane, but now he faced a new problem: the landing gear was crushing him. He began to hyperventilate at the memory, and had to stop for a minute to compose himself. "It was crushing me and I was pushing out and the wheel was pushing in," he continued. Luckily, the wheels popped out again, Ramirez said, giving him time to readjust his position before the compartment shut tight.
Inside the wheel well, it was black and deafening. "You became part of the noise. It made me shake. I put some cotton wool in my ears, but it didn’t work. When you become the noise, it’s beyond comprehension," he said. But, wedged into the corner of the compartment, he felt overjoyed. "I was content," he said, "because I made it."
He leaned against the tyres, which were hot to the touch, but cooled down quickly as the temperature in the wheel well plunged. "It was very, very freezing," he said, "and I was shivering and shaking." He passed out, and his next memory is of waking up underneath the plane in Madrid, before he blacked out again. Paramedics were called. Staff carried him into the airport and left him on the ground, thinking he was dead. Then he came to again. "I saw people around me and the room was moving around, like I was dizzy," he says. "Everything was moving, the walls were moving, and the lights were moving from side to side."
Ramirez spent the next 52 days recovering in hospital. He was an international media sensation, visited by reporters from the New York Times and Reader’s Digest. Back in Cuba, the authorities were angry. "Castro talked to my father," claimed Ramirez. "He said: ‘I don’t have any issues with you guys. The one I want to get my hands on is your son.’ Because I embarrassed them!" At first, he was unable to hear anything, and staff had to communicate with him using a chalkboard, but after a month, his hearing returned. Incredibly, he says he has suffered no long-term health consequences. "My blood pressure is normal, my heartbeat is normal," he said. He worked as a firefighter for 11 years.
A devout Christian, Ramirez believes divine intervention saved his life. "God put his hand on me," he said. He has only one regret. "After me, in Cuba, a lot of youngsters tried to do what I did," he said, "and most of them died."

When Graves had exhausted all his leads in Kenya, there was only one thing left to do: make his findings available to the media, in the hope of reviving coverage of the story and triggering someone’s memory. "People probably think that the police go out there and search for clues," he said. "But what we rely on really is the public, and witnesses seeing things and telling us."
But the idea of more media attention did not go down well with his counterparts in Kenya, Graves said. It is not hard to see why. For the people who run airports, stowaways are embarrassing, dangerous and often expensive. After San Jose’s perimeter was breached, the airport spent $15.4m upgrading 10,000ft of fencing. And for governments, these incidents are bad news, prompting people around the world to wonder why their citizens might be so desperate to leave the country that they would take such extraordinary risks. In July 2013, a 32-year-old Turkish man named Hikmet Komur died after stowing away in the wheel well of a British Airways flight from Istanbul to London. In the days after the incident, Komur’s family were visited by Turkish police and told not to push for more information on how he had accessed the plane. "They told my other uncle not to drag out the situation," Komur’s niece Fatos, a student from London, told me. "They said to drop it."
For Kenyan authorities, there may have been an additional concern. In 2017, Jomo Kenyatta International airport received a category 1 security classification, permitting direct flights to the US. "There is a general feeling among police that, if the stowaway was shown to be someone who originated from Kenya, the airport security rating would be dropped," said Kenyan journalist Hillary Orinde, who works for Agence France-Presse. "Every police officer I’ve spoken to has been cagey, for that reason."
Graves did manage to persuade Kenyan police to circulate information about the case through their police gazette, hoping to encourage regional officers to make inquiries. On his return to the UK in October, he disseminated an e-fit of the stowaway’s face – which had been reconstructed by pathologists in the days after the incident – alongside a photograph of his meagre possessions. The accompanying press release made reference to the initials written on the stowaway’s rucksack: MCA.
Reporters seized on this new information, and on 12 November, Sky news published the results of an investigation in which they claimed to have identified the stowaway as Paul Manyasi, who had been 29 and worked as a cleaner at the airport. Manyasi’s girlfriend, who was given the pseudonym "Irene", told Sky that the initials on the rucksack stood for "member of county assembly", claiming this was Manyasi’s nickname. His mother claimed to recognise his underpants.
Willy Lusige, a journalist for the Kenyan TV network KTN News, was stunned. Like many Kenyan journalists, he had followed the story closely and attempted to identify the stowaway himself, but got nowhere with the airport authorities or police. He had trouble believing the case had truly been solved. Orinde also had misgivings. "His mother said she hadn’t spoken to him for a number of years," Orinde said, "but she was able to identify his underpants?"
Both men began to dig into the Sky investigation. When Lusige found the family of the man Sky had identified as Paul Manyasi, he knew that something was wrong. "I expected because they had been told their family member was dead that there would be a sombre mood," he says, "but when I went there it was just a normal day." The father told Lusige that some white people came to visit the family and gave them $200. "Money had changed hands, and an illiterate father was convinced to go on record and say that his son was the stowaway," said Lusige.
The Sky investigation quickly disintegrated. There was no record of a Paul Manyasi ever having worked at Jomo Kenyatta airport. Nor did the parents who Sky had spoken to have a son named Paul Manyasi. Their son was called Cedric Shivonje Isaac. (It is unclear where the name Paul Manyasi came from.) Finally, there was the inconvenient, but not inconsiderable, fact that Isaac was not dead, but alive, locked up in prison in Nairobi. "When foreign journalists come and do a story in Kenya," Orinde said, "people open up, because they think that people around them will not see the story. They don’t imagine anyone at home is going to check to see if what was reported was true." On 22 November, Sky retracted the article, and published an apology.
Orinde remains perplexed by the case. "Kenya doesn’t have such a culture of people desperately trying to get to the west by any means possible," he said. Kenya is relatively wealthy compared to many other countries in the region, with the sixth-largest economy in Africa. A more pressing concern, says Orinde, are the migrant workers who go to the Gulf states, and end up being abused by their employers.
By the end of 2019, Kenyan officials had wrapped up their investigation, and no breach had been found at Jomo Kenyatta International. It retained its category 1 security status. Then, more than a year later, something strange happened. On 4 February 2021, a Turkish Airlines Airbus A330 freighter landed at Maastricht. Above the main landing gear was a 16-year-old Kenyan boy. The plane had originated from Jomo Kenyatta airport on 3 February, making stops in Istanbul and London, before landing in the Netherlands. Miraculously, the boy was alive, and apparently unharmed. He was discharged from hospital after one day.
In a statement, the teenager told Dutch investigators that he walked on to the plane and fell asleep, and explained that his motive for leaving Kenya was to seek a better life. He is now seeking asylum in the Netherlands. Jomo Kenyatta airport authorities have not acknowledged the incident, or explained how a stowaway was able to breach their security protocols once again. Flights from the airport continue to land in the UK.

We still do not know the identity of the man who fell to earth on 30 June 2019. All we know – or think we know – are the last things he would have seen and heard. The grunt and hiss of hydraulics inside the wheel well, as flight KQ 100 waited on the runway in Nairobi. The clattering footsteps on metal stairs as passengers boarded the plane. The thud of suitcases being thrown into the hold. The plane pulling away from the stand, pivoting and taxiing towards the runway. White markings flashing beneath his feet. A pause, and then the drone of Rolls-Royce engines attacking asphalt at 180mph. The plane picking up speed, the noise intensifying into the pneumatic whine of a thousand dentist’s drills. Lift-off. A whip of wind, an icy chill, and up to 10,000ft, 20,000ft, 35,000ft. Colder and colder. Unconsciousness. Oblivion.
He was buried in Lambeth cemetery on 26 February 2020. It was a beautiful morning, crisp and clear, and freezing cold. I hopped from foot to foot to stay warm, my fingers trembling as I fastened the buttons on my coat. Around me, four workers from Lambeth council, in green coveralls and mud-clogged boots, waited to see if any mourners would arrive. Beside them a man waited with a digger, ready to fill in the earth.
The council workers talked among themselves about the stowaway’s death. "Considering he fell quite far," one remarked, "he was in reasonably good condition."
"A poor person was sunbathing, weren’t they?" said the gravedigger. "Thump!"
By now, I was shaking from the cold. As they prepared to lower the body into the ground, a solitary mourner panted into view. An official from the Kenyan embassy, dressed in a black suit and leather shoes, barely making it in time. He had the harried air of a man with many obligations and better things to be getting on with. We nodded at each other, and then the workmen stepped forward. The mood switched from cheerful banter to sombre efficiency. They lowered the coffin into the ground, and inclined their heads for a few seconds. On the coffin was a metal plaque, reading: "Unknown (Male), Died 30th June 2019, Aged 30."
The horror of the Kenya Airways stowaway’s death made for newspaper headlines, but many more migrants die, in equally horrific circumstances, every week. They are locked in the back of lorries and asphyxiate, or fall from moving freight trains, or drown in the Channel. They are shot by border patrol guards through chain link fences, or electrocuted in the Channel tunnel, or beaten to death by racist mobs. They are held in detention centres for years, where they are subject to physical and sexual abuse. Sometimes, they burn themselves alive, out of despair. Since 2014, 10,134 people have died on global migration routes, according to the Missing Migrants project. These figures are likely only a tiny fraction of the true picture.
When the body was in the ground, the embassy worker spun on his heels and hurried away. I looked at the grave. A nameless man lay before me in a little plot of south-west London, in an unmarked grave, identifiable only by a simple wooden cross and a numeric code. There are so many people like him. They keep quiet counsel in unvisited graves, and their stories vanish with them.
Like all exiles, Michael Fleming remembers when his separation from home soil began: 20 October 2015, a Tuesday. That year, Fleming was captain of Wentworth, an old, prestigious golf club in north-west Surrey. The club had recently been bought by a Chinese firm, Reignwood Consulting Ltd, and an annual general meeting was scheduled for the 20th. On that morning, having already drafted his speech, Fleming was in his dentistry clinic when he received the email.
Brace for change, Wentworth wrote to Fleming and his colleagues, outlining its planned announcements at the AGM: a wild increase in membership fees and the number of members drained from about 4,000 to just a few hundred. A "barmy" decision, Michael Parkinson, the chatshow host and a longtime member, had told the Mail on Sunday, which had scooped the details two days earlier. Peter Alliss, the BBC golf commentator, complained that Reignwood was "bringing an Asian philosophy to Britain". Fleming, whose manner is so mild it’s hard to ever imagine him yelling "Fore", was shocked. He began rewriting his speech.
The AGM that evening was standing room only: a couple of hundred fretful people packed into the club’s ballroom. Stephen Gibson, Wentworth’s new CEO, laid out the coming transformation. Wentworth ought to be "the Augusta of Europe", Gibson said – as coveted and rarefied as the club that hosts the US Masters, and presumably as moneyed. To this end, members would have to reapply to join, paying £100,000 for a "debenture" – in essence loaning the money to Reignwood and its owner, a Chinese billionaire named Yan Bin, for a term of 50 years. Members would also have to fork out higher annual dues: £10,000 for an individual or £16,000 for a family, where previously a family had paid about £8,000.
Even if all the members could afford this – a remote possibility, since the club was home not just to multimillionaires and CEOs, but also estate agents and dentists – not everyone would get back in. To make things exclusive, Yan Bin wanted to issue just 888 debentures. The number is lucky in China, although not so much at Wentworth, since three-quarters of the members stood to lose their memberships altogether. "There were ructions," one attender told me. "People were very upset." One member, Sir Stanley Simmons, now in his 80s and once the Queen’s physician, protested. He’d been at Wentworth for more than 50 years, he said, and he recognised that he didn’t have many rounds left to play. Why would he spend a fresh £100,000? Gibson’s response, another member recalled, was: "Don’t worry, Sir Stanley, you can bequeath it."
When Fleming rose to speak, he struck a defiant note. "Some of you will need to fasten your seatbelts." Yan Bin really needed to improve the greens, he said, instead of launching doomed ideas like the debenture. The cull of members would destroy Wentworth’s traditions, Fleming warned. "It would be a shame for our new owners not to be considered honourable." As he wound down, though, he sounded doleful, as if already lamenting a bygone era. "At least we will be able to say we were here in the good times."
Since its founding in 1922, the golf club has been the nucleus of Wentworth Estate, a private community of villas, which occupies 700 hectares. About 500 of its houses sit on public roads. The other 300-odd, bigger and more expensive still, are located on the private roads that snake through the golf club and wrap tightly around it. These residents call their part of the estate "The Island". If you’re a newcomer, it isn’t always easy to know when you’re on a golf course and when you aren’t. The lands of the Island and the club run in and out of each other, like a zip’s interlocking teeth. Wayward balls come to earth in the gardens of houses. A few of the roads intersect fairways, and their verges are putting-green grassy. Some of the homes are so luxurious that they might be mistaken for small clubhouses. This is Virginia Water, after all – the first British town outside London where the average sale price of a house hit £1m back in 2013.
There’s no mistaking the actual clubhouse once you come upon it: a long, low structure with crenellated walls and turrets over the door. It looks well-prepared for a lengthy siege against insurrectionist caddies. To golfers everywhere, Wentworth is the birthplace of the Ryder Cup, the home of the BMW PGA Championship and one of the world’s most prestigious courses. To those on the Island who golf, the club is why they live where they live. Nigel Moss, a management consultant who is a member and a resident of the Island, told me: "It’s our hub, it’s our pub, it’s our church, it’s our community centre."
The reforms threatened to evict most of the occupants from this hallowed space, pushing the club past the reach of the merely rich and towards the outrageously wealthy – the kind of people who can whip out a spare hundred-K for a golf membership. A coalition of members, including Fleming and Moss, embarked on an energetic PR campaign, saying that Wentworth would be destroyed, and that neither Yan Bin nor Gibson understood its culture or history. The press ate it up, spotting in this rift between what one headline called the "well-to-do" and the "stinking rich" an opportunity for the mocking weep of tiny violins. Several reports quoted Parkinson, a man not short of money, grumbling that Yan Bin just wanted "a car park full of Lamborghinis". One Times report on the argument sat next to a piece headlined: "Billionaire wins legal fight over £15m yacht that was too small."
The ongoing clash between Yan Bin and his club’s members has witnessed several dramatic phases: threats, lawsuits, duplicity, negotiations, truces, even death. But the tale isn’t just about the preposterousness of the wealthy. Rather, it’s impossible to learn about all this turmoil – in a place called "the Island", for crying out loud – and not see it as an allegory. With its groves of pine and rhododendrons, its houses named Heatherbrook or Bluebell Wood or Silver Birches, and the gentle hillocks of its club’s fairways, Wentworth Estate holds dear a vision of pastoral Englishness. But since the 1980s, Wentworth has been reshaped – just like England itself – by money: first the wealth of the homegrown 1%, which considered itself immune to the turmoil of change, but which then found itself subject to the whims of the globalised capital held by the 0.001% like Yan Bin. The saga is familiar: a small locality unsettled by the arrival of an outsider. Except that the outsider is a transnational holding corporation, and the locality is Wentworth Estate, a slice of England overtaken by the world.

Michael Fleming joined the club so long ago that he can’t remember the exact year: 1984 or 1985, he thinks. Unable to afford a house on Wentworth Estate, he and his wife found one in the village of Sunningdale – still pretty affluent, all things considered, and a close enough drive that Fleming could start lacing his shoes up in his kitchen and be on the first tee seven minutes later.
Wentworth is a magnet for devoted golfers. It was in the Burma Bar here, after a friendly between American and British golfers in 1926, that the garden-seed magnate Samuel Ryder proposed repeating the fixture regularly – the germination of the Ryder Cup. The club hosts the European Tour’s PGA Championship every May. Jack Nicklaus, Sam Snead and Nick Faldo have played here. Ernie Els, once the world’s top-ranked golfer, told me he still remembers "the sound of the shots echoing in among the trees" from his first game at the club; he loved Wentworth so much he eventually bought a house nearby. When Fleming joined, Wentworth had two 18-hole courses, the East and the West. A third, the Edinburgh, was added in 1990. These are difficult courses, Fleming said – courses for serious golf. "You’d hate the game if you started learning here. It’d be like getting into a Formula One car before ever driving anything else."
A round of golf requires such a luxurious surplus of space and time that it can never have been called an ordinary person’s game. And by the 80s, golf clubs had long gained their reputation as being sanctuaries for the corporate wealthy – as places where these executives not only spent their money but colluded to make more of it. Still, Fleming insists that Wentworth in those days wasn’t just for rich people. "No one asked what you did for a living. I couldn’t even say how many of the people I played with had been to university." Back then, he paid close to £1,000 a year in fees – in today’s money, less than £3,000. No one cared how good the food was, or even ate dinner there. It was golf and little else.
By and by, that changed. More golf courses opened up in the green belt around London, as farmers sold their land and as new retirees and the Thatcherite wealthy took up hobbies. Chelsfield, the property development firm that owned the biggest stake in Wentworth, spruced the club up. Tennis courts. An indoor pool. A new driving range. When Chelsfield sold Wentworth in 2005, the clothing tycoon Richard Caring paid £130m for it. Caring had outbid, among others, the Savoy Hotels group, and although he loved golf, he itched with mild buyer’s remorse. He wasn’t very good at auctions, he told the Financial Times. He suspected he’d ended up paying 50% more than the club was worth.
Caring invested heavily. He improved the club’s food and service. He hired Ernie Els to lead a £6.5m renovation of the West Course – to design new bunkers, to tonsure the putting greens and plant them with a different kind of grass. The project took 13 years. "It needed to be done," Els told me. "I mean, the course had barely been touched in 80-something years."
Get the Guardian’s award-winning long reads sent direct to you every Saturday morning
But the members always felt that Caring had one eye cocked for buyers, so that he could earn his money back quickly. The fees rose beyond "the average person’s comfort zone", Fleming said. (Although, of course, most golf club fees have never fallen within the average person’s comfort zone.) The membership increasingly comprised young bankers and lawyers who drove in from London for the rare game. Caring even wanted to build a hotel around the club, to drive up its value, another member said, but his move to get planning permission was stymied by Wentworth Estate’s homeowners. Finally, in 2014, Caring sold the club to Reignwood for £135m – a slender profit. Which was how Wentworth Estate came to be home to Yan Bin, who blew into the club’s snug, staid world and turned it upside down.

A Chinese conglomerate’s entry into Wentworth Estate was novel, but it wasn’t like Wentworth hadn’t seen money before. Yan Bin is only the latest, and among the very richest, of a long line of well-heeled arrivals. Beginning in the 80s, in particular, the Island attracted people with a high order of wealth – all of whom have found, over the past decade or so, that they, in turn, are being inconveniently supplanted by people with an altogether more stratospheric order of wealth.
The club and estate were both founded by WG Tarrant, a bearded, boulder-headed developer. In the 20s, Tarrant bought the grounds of Wentworth from its last noble owner, turned the mansion into the clubhouse, and arranged golf courses around it. The club brought golfers, and golfers were wealthy, so Tarrant sold them homes, each set on at least half a hectare of land, and some on five or 10. The houses had porches, gabled roofs and half-timbered frames, the kind of rustic quality that Londoners longed for after their weekly dose of Country Life. The cartoonist Osbert Lancaster named this style of architecture Wimbledon Transitional and once sketched an exemplar. A woman stands in the balcony of a Tarrant-type house, waving to her husband as he strides out in plus-fours, a pipe in his mouth and a dog at his heels. On his shoulder, he has slung a bag of golf clubs.
Few people know Wentworth better than James Wyatt. He grew up in Virginia Water in the 70s and is a partner at Barton Wyatt, an estate agency run out of Tarrant’s old office. His grandfather bought the agency in 1965 – well after Tarrant ran up debt and sold his company; well after the second world war, when the army requisitioned the club. (Underground, soldiers built a set of bomb-proof war rooms, for Churchill to use if London proved too dangerous; on the links, a home guard unit practised lobbing grenades across sand traps. Bunkers below, bunkers above.) When Wyatt was a boy, the Island drew celebrities such as Cliff Richard and Elton John. "Two of the Bee Gees rode around in their open-top Rolls. A guy who lived up the road from my parents was the bass guitarist for Yes."
In the 80s, financiers and entrepreneurs settled here, pleased to be well-situated for Heathrow and a brief train-ride away from the City. (The kind of people, the writer Iain Sinclair found when he stalked the capital’s outskirts for his book London Orbital, who "promise to quit Britain if another Labour government is voted in. And they honour that promise. Wentworth is another country.") The vanguard of overseas buyers arrived soon after, Wyatt said: "Swedes, running away from their enormous taxes." Augusto Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator, lived here from 1998 to 2000, under house arrest in a bungalow called Everglades. His supporters rented it for £10,000 a month.
More foreign buyers in the 00s: Middle Eastern royals; Russians like Pyotr Aven, who heads one of his country’s largest banks; the kings of three Malaysian provinces. These homeowners are rarely seen, using these residences only for a month or two each year. The houses got bigger and plusher, until they resembled hotels. Wyatt looks after at least three houses that spend close to £500,000 yearly on maintenance alone. Owners install massage rooms, cinemas and hairdressing salons. "One house I saw had a present-wrapping room in the basement," Wyatt said. "There were racks of gifts, wrapping paper, and a big table in the middle to wrap things." The British Islanders aren’t always happy about their new neighbours; Nigel Moss told me, ruefully, that his road might as well be called "Russia Row", there were so many Russian-owned homes on it.
After Yan Bin bought the club in 2014, he also bought a Wentworth house through a holding company: a 900-square-metre mansion named Robinswood. Its previous owner, a Russian gas tycoon, had put it on the market for £18m. It wasn’t a stretch for Yan Bin to think that, to be maximally profitable, his club should forget about the dentists on its rolls and target the exorbitantly wealthy like himself. After all, there were enough of them right here on the Island. Justifying the debenture, Gibson, the club’s CEO, asked one reporter: "Did you get a look at any of the houses when you drove in this morning?"
The Island changed, in other words, just as Britain did. The country, too, became a domicile for people who had made fortunes elsewhere. They found that Britain called to them with open arms and lax tax regimes, even as its politicians were erecting barriers for immigrants of more modest means. The plutocratic few arrived to buy property in central London, Scottish estates, football clubs or newspapers. This influx of money drove up property prices, deadened neighbourhoods by stocking them with the silent mansions of absentee landlords and influenced politics. It fed a fixation among some Britons about who Britain is really for, about the rich as well as the not-at-all-rich who wished to move here, about the world outside, and about Britain’s dwindling station in it.
Versions of these anxieties exist even within the cocoon of Wentworth. Moss, who sits on the Wentworth Residents Association’s executive committee, told me that, for 15 or 20 years now, homeowners have worried about the ease with which interlopers enter the Island. In 2018, a police squad had to track down 15 people – "suspected illegal immigrants", according to one police tweet – who’d been hanging off the back of a lorry before running into Wentworth Estate. There are already police cameras at each of the estate’s 19 entrances, capturing the number plates of cars driving through. Now the residents are installing boom barriers at these entrances, trying to secure the Island more effectively from the outside world.
Yan Bin’s takeover of the club provoked a similar agitation. In escalating the fees, he was looking for a new kind of member, which left the old kind of member out in the cold. Moss described it to me as a "culture clash. He made no attempt to understand the club. He thought he could do what he wanted, basically." He had the right to think this, Moss said: it was his club.
But the golfers could still resist, so Moss and some others formed their coalition, calling it "Wet Feet" after a Chinese proverb: "It never rains on your neighbours without you getting your feet wet." Then they set about learning more about Yan Bin and parleying with his representatives. "It makes me question," Moss said, "what would have happened if we hadn’t stepped up."

For a group of jilted golfers in Surrey, Yan Bin was a remote, formidable adversary. Reignwood, his Hong Kong-based holding company, has numerous interests – golf, aviation, finance, petrochemicals – but he made most of his money selling energy drinks. This he did, in the style of most billionaires, through a combination of political muscle and scrappy street-fighting – and, his critics claim, a hazy sense of ethics. I tried contacting him, but a Reignwood executive refused all interviews. Stephen Gibson, the former CEO, said he’d been unwell and declined to comment, as did Neil Coulson, the club’s current general manager.
None of Wet Feet’s members have properly met Yan Bin. He flies in for the awards ceremony of Wentworth’s annual PGA tournament but remains unapproachable. One club member told me that the most he’d seen of Yan Bin was in 2017, when Reignwood launched a new Four Seasons Hotel in London. "Some of us were invited to the opening, where there was a concert by the London Symphony Orchestra." Plácido Domingo sang an aria; then an ensemble of Chinese musicians played for a while. Finally, Yan Bin himself – a short man with a square face – took the stage to sing a Chinese song, backed by the orchestra. "He doesn’t have a great voice, but he belted it out. I can best describe it as karaoke," the member said. "There was a big screen behind him with a translation of the lyrics. It was clearly a Communist party anthem of some kind, about Chinese flags flying high."
Born in 1954, in the coastal province of Shandong, Yan Bin emigrated to Thailand in the 80s and, after fighting through a few years of poverty, set up the company that became Reignwood; six years later, he returned home with money, an alternate Thai name – Chanchai Ruayrungruang – and contacts. In 1995, he set up a joint venture with a Thai firm called the TCP Group to manufacture and sell the energy drink Red Bull in China.
The recipe for Red Bull is the property of the TCP Group, which licenses others to make and market the drink outside Thailand, earning royalties and dividends from the sales. The drink is calibrated to local tastes: fizzier in some countries, flatter and more medicinal elsewhere. In most parts of the world, the licensee is Red Bull GmbH, an Austrian company, which designed the drink’s distinctive blue-and-silver can. In China, Yan Bin’s genius lay in positioning Red Bull as a premium product, selling it in a heavy, gold-coloured can and pricing it at 6-8 yuan (roughly 60-90p), twice the cost of a can of Coke.
His success was spectacular. "In China, pregnant women at hospitals are sometimes given Red Bull to stimulate labour," a well-placed source in the energy drinks industry told me. "Children drink Red Bull before exams." In 2019, Red Bull earned Reignwood $3.1bn in revenue. Estimates of Yan Bin’s wealth vary wildly: the Bloomberg Billionaires Index pegged it at $2.9bn in 2019, while the Hurun Report’s annual China Rich List put it last year at $16.2bn. He takes meetings in his smoking jacket, a pipe in hand, and often helicopters around Beijing. "In the 1990s and early 2000s, China was unbridled in its development," one person familiar with Reignwood’s business said. "Yan Bin is considered a hero of that economic success."
Around the turn of the century, Yan Bin built his first golf club, Pine Valley: 54 holes designed by Jack Nicklaus, set within a 2,500-hectare resort near Beijing, a property so lavish that it’s as if its owner had demanded something like Versailles, only grander. Its membership once cost as much as $300,000, a former Reignwood manager told me. He said that Yan Bin sees golf as a networking opportunity: "He likes to make friends with government officials and celebrities." On Facebook, Yan Bin’s daughter once posted a strange, recursive image of herself with Donald Trump, from a meeting well before he became president. They seem to be in Trump’s office, because the wall behind them is jammed with framed magazine covers featuring Trump. He flashes his customary rictus and thumbs up; she holds a photo of a previous instance when she and her father met Trump in the very same room.
Along the way, Yan Bin cultivated a close relationship to the Communist party. Reignwood promotes Chinese foreign policy by hosting forums on the belt and road initiative, China’s domineering infrastructure plan. He belongs to the national committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, a body that advises the party. These connections have often insulated him from political interference. Even as the government cracked down on golf over the past decade, calling it a corrupt and decadent game and shutting down courses all over the country, Pine Valley has thrived.
But Yan Bin’s party ties proved futile in a legal snarl over his main money-spinner: Red Bull. In 2013, Red Bull GmbH secured a China licence as well, to sell its version of the drink in its blue-and-silver can. Soon after, the energy drinks industry source said, the TCP Group found it was being shortchanged. Its joint venture with Reignwood was highly profitable, but the TCP Group wasn’t being paid all the dividends it was owed. And Yan Bin had set up other companies to make Red Bull products. In the figures it provided to the TCP Group, Reignwood claimed to manufacture 1-1.5bn cans a year. But in total, it was suspected to be selling at least three times as many.
The TCP Group refused to renew its licence and, when the joint venture continued to market Red Bull, sued the company. Perhaps unnerved by these complications, the TCP Group also began operating directly in China, launching yet another Red Bull – in a golden can, identical to that sold by Yan Bin. "We’re in a surreal situation where there are three companies selling Red Bull here," the source in the energy drinks industry said with a laugh when we spoke in November. A month later, China’s highest court ruled against Yan Bin, saying he’d been using the Red Bull trademark illegally. In all likelihood, he may no longer be able to sell the brand that made him his fortune.
In its entirety, the episode reminded me of something Ni Songhua, a former Reignwood vice-president, once told the Financial Times. Yan Bin, he said, "is very good at getting people to trust him and do projects for him. But when the time comes to pay up, then he goes cool on you, and you find the deal is not what you thought you had."

Wentworth popped up on Yan Bin’s shopping list when he began roving overseas, looking for things to buy. At one point, close to 90% of Reignwood’s cashflow came from Red Bull, so diversification seemed essential. One of Reignwood’s first major purchases overseas was of a luxury apartment complex in Singapore in 2013, for an estimated $400m. (Each flat above the ground floor has a "sky garage," so that residents can turntable their cars up and park them next to their living rooms.) The same year, Reignwood bought the Corn Exchange building in London, an 18th-century grain market now occupied by offices. Next, in addition to Wentworth, Reignwood snapped up the Port of London authority’s old headquarters and spent nearly £500m to turn it into a luxury hotel.
Until about a decade ago, "it was largely Chinese state-owned enterprises doing the investing abroad," said Sarah Hall, a professor at the University of Nottingham, who studies the flows of financial globalisation. Mostly, these funds poured into sectors like energy or mining. Then Chinese magnates started to spend. In the UK, they followed the groove traversed first by Middle Eastern investors and then Russian ones, buying into commercial real estate, technology and financial services. They paid special attention to brands that came with prestige or popular renown: the Greene King pub chain, Wolverhampton Wanderers football club, Loch Lomond Distillers. In 2018, in the most emphatic such example, China’s government bought the Royal Mint Court, opposite the Tower of London, and announced that it would move its embassy into these premises. Yan Bin’s interest in the historic sites of the Corn Exchange and the Port of London authority fit this pattern neatly – as did his purchase of Wentworth.
It’s tempting to read into these acquisitions China’s desire to stamp its new primacy upon the old bastions of western power. Certainly there is some symbolism in China situating its new embassy within the very building that once received the shipments of silver that China was forced to pay the UK at the end of the opium wars. Or, for that matter, in Yan Bin’s reported desire to clone Wentworth back east. And certainly these developments often send some sections of the polity and media into a froth. In the Mail on Sunday, referring to the purchase of several British schools by Chinese companies, Nigel Farage called this a prong of a "neo-colonial project", and fretted that these schools would teach "a sanitised version of Chinese history and politics" – rather than, presumably, a similar version of British history and politics. But China and the Chinese super-wealthy are merely implementing with particular alacrity the beliefs of other great powers of the recent past: that capital must be unimpeded, that it cares little for history or sentiment. It just so happens that, in this century, there’s money to be made not just from oil or ore, but also from the very institutions set up by those making the money in a time gone by.

After Wentworth announced its fee rise, in 2015, Wet Feet hired lawyers to draft a letter to the club. The letter argued that the club was breaking the contractual rights of members and its covenant with Wentworth Estate, whose residents were always entitled to be members if they wished. "I’m not saying these issues weren’t absolutely valid," Moss said. "But we knew we would never win. It might have taken years and hundreds of thousands of pounds to take it all the way through the courts, by which time there would have been an exodus of members from the club and Yan Bin would have outspent us."
Better to protest, they reasoned, by loudly occupying the moral high ground. With the help of a PR firm – not a resource usually available to agitators – Wet Feet fed newspapers with details of their protest. Michael Fleming, wearing his club blazer, went to the Chinese embassy to deliver a petition against Reignwood. ("We nearly got arrested going in. But we delivered it OK. The door opened just this much – between a thumb and a finger – and they took the letter." There was no response.)
Wet Feet roped in Philip Hammond, their local MP and Britain’s foreign secretary at the time, who promised to seek a meeting with Yan Bin and intervene. (Hammond did meet Ni Songhua a couple of times, Moss said.) A spot of Gandhian civil disobedience was also threatened. "We can, in practice, make it very difficult to hold an event like the PGA," a resident told the BBC. "There are obviously a lot of people who are prepared to block the road if required."
Wet Feet’s members think the press campaign – and particularly a large, embarrassing story in the South China Morning Post in Hong Kong – forced Yan Bin to soften. But he may simply have had too much on his plate at the time: the Red Bull litigation, a £146m slab of debt that financed his purchase of Wentworth, cost escalations at his Four Seasons-to-be, and a plan to buy part of New York’s Standard High Line hotel.
The truce came in March 2016. Through Ni Songhua, one of its vice-presidents, Reignwood accepted some compromises. Existing members could continue on an annual fee, although higher than the one they’d been paying. Or they could put down a £20,000 advance on an £85,000 debenture, hand over the remainder after three years, and pay a lower annual fee. New members, though, had to buy a fresh debenture for £125,000 – a figure that has since ballooned to £150,000.
Fleming decided he couldn’t afford Wentworth any more and joined West Hill Golf Club nearby, paying around £2,400 annually. "I couldn’t see Wentworth being the same as it was," he said. "You felt as if the heart of the club was being destroyed. I didn’t want to be around to see that happening."
One of Wet Feet’s most vociferous members, though, opted for the debenture, and Wet Feet itself was dissolved. Why? I asked. After all the energies they’d expended, why did he decide to pay up?
He shrugged. They were conscious, he said, that if they dragged out their campaign, they’d eventually lose any public sympathy they had – that they’d be seen as a chorus of privileged grumblers. And he lived on the estate, after all, he said. Where else was he going to golf? "I look at it as a lifestyle choice … It would be like cutting my nose to spite my face to not accept the concessions."
We were talking in his house, and I wondered if there were many others like him – members who actually could afford the debenture but who’d really just balked at being asked abruptly to pay it by a faceless Chinese corporation. But I didn’t have time to complete that thought; he’d promised to show me the club, so we drove there in his car. It was December and pouring, and although a lockdown had just ended, several Covid-19 rules were still in force – the worst way to explore Wentworth. (During the pandemic, the club took hundreds of thousands of pounds of taxpayer funds to furlough its staff.)
We ambled, masked, through the clubhouse. I saw the Burma Bar, which Reignwood had renovated, turning it from an old-school 19th hole into an anodyne place that belonged, as members joked, "in a premiere Premier Inn". Reignwood had also done away with the ancient wooden honours’ boards lining the walls and corridors; after an outcry, it commissioned replacements, which look new and – there’s no other way to say this – cheap. Ironic, given the price of the debenture, I remarked. My guide smiled grimly.
After the truce, the turbulence at Wentworth subsided, but only slightly. Reignwood made some improvements to the club, the Wet Feet-ers granted – chief among them the installation of a vast underground ventilation system that dries out the fairways. It also seemed, for a while, as if Reignwood was preoccupied with other matters – not just the Red Bull litigation in China, but even problems in the UK. In 2017, Reignwood dismissed Ni Songhua, who promptly sued, claiming he’d been denied his promised share in Yan Bin’s European ventures. Reignwood sued Ni in turn, alleging, among other things, that he had "refused to provide an account of his stewardship" of 32,000 bottles of wine, worth around £4.8m. Before any of this could be resolved, Ni died.
Then, two years ago, Gibson was forced out of his position. After he found out that he’d been replaced by Yan Bin’s daughter, Gibson, a white man, sued Wentworth for racial discrimination, claiming £750,000 in damages. Last November, Gibson confirmed to me that he had "an important legal hearing" coming up but refused to say any more. On LinkedIn, puzzlingly, he still calls himself "CEO at Reignwood Investments UK Ltd and Wentworth Club Ltd".
Despite these hiccups, it’s hard to not conclude that Yan Bin, in striking his deal with Wet Feet, has outfoxed them. For one, he killed the barrage of bad press. His debenture is still in place, and people have purchased it – the kind who can afford to pay £150,000. With the older members, he can keep raising the yearly fee – as he has done, from £10,000 for an individual in 2017 to £13,000 now – according to his needs.
And he will have good reason to do that. He has a loan to finance, and Wentworth is leaking money: a loss on ordinary activities after tax of £16m in 2018, and of £9m in 2019. A recent circular warned those without debentures of a fee rise around the corner, in 2022. As long as he can hold on to the club, and is interested in it, Yan Bin can make it what he wants it to be. He is still, when all is said and done, enormously wealthy. His wealth affords him patience, so he has merely deferred his win. But the win will come, the member of the erstwhile Wet Feet said. "There’s no question about it. The writing is on the wall."
After years of starting the day with a tall morning coffee, followed by several glasses of green tea at intervals, and the occasional cappuccino after lunch, I quit caffeine, cold turkey. It was not something that I particularly wanted to do, but I had come to the reluctant conclusion that the story I was writing demanded it. Several of the experts I was interviewing had suggested that I really couldn’t understand the role of caffeine in my life – its invisible yet pervasive power – without getting off it and then, presumably, getting back on. Roland Griffiths, one of the world’s leading researchers of mood-altering drugs, and the man most responsible for getting the diagnosis of "caffeine withdrawal" included in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), the bible of psychiatric diagnoses, told me he hadn’t begun to understand his own relationship with caffeine until he stopped using it and conducted a series of self-experiments. He urged me to do the same.
For most of us, to be caffeinated to one degree or another has simply become baseline human consciousness. Something like 90% of humans ingest caffeine regularly, making it the most widely used psychoactive drug in the world, and the only one we routinely give to children (commonly in the form of fizzy drinks). Few of us even think of it as a drug, much less our daily use of it as an addiction. It’s so pervasive that it’s easy to overlook the fact that to be caffeinated is not baseline consciousness but, in fact, an altered state. It just happens to be a state that virtually all of us share, rendering it invisible.
The scientists have spelled out, and I had duly noted, the predictable symptoms of caffeine withdrawal: headache, fatigue, lethargy, difficulty concentrating, decreased motivation, irritability, intense distress, loss of confidence and dysphoria. But beneath that deceptively mild rubric of "difficulty concentrating" hides nothing short of an existential threat to the work of the writer. How can you possibly expect to write anything when you can’t concentrate?
I postponed it as long as I could, but finally the dark day arrived. According to the researchers I’d interviewed, the process of withdrawal had actually begun overnight, while I was sleeping, during the "trough" in the graph of caffeine’s diurnal effects. The day’s first cup of tea or coffee acquires most of its power – its joy! – not so much from its euphoric and stimulating properties than from the fact that it is suppressing the emerging symptoms of withdrawal. This is part of the insidiousness of caffeine. Its mode of action, or "pharmacodynamics", mesh so perfectly with the rhythms of the human body that the morning cup of coffee arrives just in time to head off the looming mental distress set in motion by yesterday’s cup of coffee. Daily, caffeine proposes itself as the optimal solution to the problem caffeine creates.
Sign up to the long read weekly email
At the coffee shop, instead of my usual "half caff", I ordered a cup of mint tea. And on this morning, that lovely dispersal of the mental fog that the first hit of caffeine ushers into consciousness never arrived. The fog settled over me and would not budge. It’s not that I felt terrible – I never got a serious headache – but all day long I felt a certain muzziness, as if a veil had descended in the space between me and reality, a kind of filter that absorbed certain wavelengths of light and sound.
I was able to do some work, but distractedly. "I feel like an unsharpened pencil," I wrote in my notebook. "Things on the periphery intrude, and won’t be ignored. I can’t focus for more than a minute."
Over the course of the next few days, I began to feel better, the veil lifted, yet I was still not quite myself, and neither, quite, was the world. In this new normal, the world seemed duller to me. I seemed duller, too. Mornings were the worst. I came to see how integral caffeine is to the daily work of knitting ourselves back together after the fraying of consciousness during sleep. That reconsolidation of self took much longer than usual, and never quite felt complete.

Humanity’s acquaintance with caffeine is surprisingly recent. But it is hardly an exaggeration to say that this molecule remade the world. The changes wrought by coffee and tea occurred at a fundamental level – the level of the human mind. Coffee and tea ushered in a shift in the mental weather, sharpening minds that had been fogged by alcohol, freeing people from the natural rhythms of the body and the sun, thus making possible whole new kinds of work and, arguably, new kinds of thought, too.
By the 15th century, coffee was being cultivated in east Africa and traded across the Arabian peninsula. Initially, the new drink was regarded as an aide to concentration and used by Sufis in Yemen to keep them from dozing off during their religious observances. (Tea, too, started out as a little helper for Buddhist monks striving to stay awake through long stretches of meditation.) Within a century, coffeehouses had sprung up in cities across the Arab world. In 1570 there were more than 600 of them in Constantinople alone, and they spread north and west with the Ottoman empire.
The Islamic world at this time was in many respects more advanced than Europe, in science and technology, and in learning. Whether this mental flourishing had anything to do with the prevalence of coffee (and prohibition of alcohol) is difficult to prove, but as the German historian Wolfgang Schivelbusch has argued, the beverage "seemed to be tailor-​made for a culture that forbade alcohol consumption and gave birth to modern mathematics".
In 1629 the first coffeehouses in Europe, styled on Arab and Turkish models, popped up in Venice, and the first such establishment in England was opened in Oxford in 1650 by a Jewish immigrant. They arrived in London shortly thereafter, and proliferated: within a few decades there were thousands of coffeehouses in London; at their peak, one for every 200 Londoners.
To call the English coffeehouse a new kind of public space doesn’t quite do it justice. You paid a penny for the coffee, but the information – in the form of newspapers, books, magazines and conversation – was free. (Coffeehouses were often referred to as "penny universities".) After visiting London coffeehouses, a French writer named Maximilien Misson wrote, "You have all Manner of News there; You have a good fire, which you may sit by as long as you please: You have a Dish of Coffee; you meet your Friends for the Transaction of Business, and all for a Penny, if you don’t care to spend more."
London’s coffeehouses were distinguished one from another by the professional or intellectual interests of their patrons, which eventually gave them specific institutional identities. So, for example, merchants and men with interests in shipping gathered at Lloyd’s Coffee House. Here you could learn what ships were arriving and departing, and buy an insurance policy on your cargo. Lloyd’s Coffee House eventually became the insurance brokerage Lloyd’s of London. Learned types and scientists – known then as "natural philosophers" – gathered at the Grecian, which became closely associated with the Royal Society; Isaac Newton and Edmond Halley debated physics and mathematics here, and supposedly once dissected a dolphin on the premises.
The conversation in London’s coffee houses frequently turned to politics, in vigorous exercises of free speech that drew the ire of the government, especially after the monarchy was restored in 1660. Charles II, worried that plots were being hatched in coffeehouses, decided that the places were dangerous fomenters of rebellion that the crown needed to suppress. In 1675 the king moved to close down the coffeehouses, on the grounds that the "false, malicious and scandalous Reports" emanating therefrom were a "Disturbance of the Quiet and Peace of the Realm". Like so many other compounds that change the qualities of consciousness in individuals, caffeine was regarded as a threat to institutional power, which moved to suppress it, in a foreshadowing of the wars against drugs to come.
But the king’s war against coffee lasted only 11 days. Charles discovered that it was too late to turn back the tide of caffeine. By then the coffeehouse was such a fixture of English culture and daily life – and so many eminent Londoners had become addicted to caffeine – that everyone simply ignored the king’s order and blithely went on drinking coffee. Afraid to test his authority and find it lacking, the king quietly backed down, issuing a second proclamation rolling back the first "out of princely consideration and royal compassion".
It’s hard to imagine that the sort of political, cultural and intellectual ferment that bubbled up in the coffeehouses of both France and England in the 17th century would ever have developed in a tavern. The kind of magical thinking that alcohol sponsored in the medieval mind began to yield to a new spirit of rationalism and, a bit later, Enlightenment thinking. French historian Jules Michelet wrote: "Coffee, the sober drink, the mighty nourishment of the brain, which unlike other spirits, heightens purity and lucidity; coffee, which clears the clouds of the imagination and their gloomy weight; which illumines the reality of things suddenly with the flash of truth."
To see, lucidly, "the reality of things": this was, in a nutshell, the rationalist project. Coffee became, along with the microscope, telescope and the pen, one of its indispensable tools.

After a few weeks, the mental impairments of withdrawal had subsided, and I could once again think in a straight line, hold an abstraction in my head for more than two minutes, and shut peripheral thoughts out of my field of attention. Yet I continued to feel as though I was mentally just slightly behind the curve, especially when in the company of drinkers of coffee and tea, which, of course, was all the time and everywhere.
Here’s what I was missing: I missed the way caffeine and its rituals used to order my day, especially in the morning. Herbal teas – which are barely, if at all, psychoactive – lack the power of coffee and tea to organise the day into a rhythm of energetic peaks and valleys, as the mental tide of caffeine ebbs and flows. The morning surge is a blessing, obviously, but there is also something comforting in the ebb tide of afternoon, which a cup of tea can gently reverse.
At some point I began to wonder if perhaps it was all in my head, this sense that I had lost a mental step since getting off coffee and tea. So I decided to look at the science, to learn what, if any, cognitive enhancement can actually be attributed to caffeine. I found numerous studies conducted over the years reporting that caffeine improves performance on a range of cognitive measures – of memory, focus, alertness, vigilance, attention and learning. An experiment done in the 1930s found that chess players on caffeine performed significantly better than players who abstained. In another study, caffeine users completed a variety of mental tasks more quickly, though they made more errors; as one paper put it in its title, people on caffeine are "faster, but not smarter". In a 2014 experiment, subjects given caffeine immediately after learning new material remembered it better than subjects who received a placebo. Tests of psychomotor abilities also suggest that caffeine gives us an edge: in simulated driving exercises, caffeine improves performance, especially when the subject is tired. It also enhances physical performance on such metrics as time trials, muscle strength and endurance.
True, there is reason to take these findings with a pinch of salt, if only because this kind of research is difficult to do well. The problem is finding a good control group in a society in which virtually everyone is addicted to caffeine. But the consensus seems to be that caffeine does improve mental (and physical) performance to some degree.
Whether caffeine also enhances creativity is a different question, however, and there’s some reason to doubt that it does. Caffeine improves our focus and ability to concentrate, which surely enhances linear and abstract thinking, but creativity works very differently. It may depend on the loss of a certain kind of focus, and the freedom to let the mind off the leash of linear thought.
Cognitive psychologists sometimes talk in terms of two distinct types of consciousness: spotlight consciousness, which illuminates a single focal point of attention, making it very good for reasoning, and lantern consciousness, in which attention is less focused yet illuminates a broader field of attention. Young children tend to exhibit lantern consciousness; so do many people on psychedelics. This more diffuse form of attention lends itself to mind wandering, free association, and the making of novel connections – all of which can nourish creativity. By comparison, caffeine’s big contribution to human progress has been to intensify spotlight consciousness – the focused, linear, abstract and efficient cognitive processing more closely associated with mental work than play. This, more than anything else, is what made caffeine the perfect drug not only for the age of reason and the Enlightenment, but for the rise of capitalism, too.
The power of caffeine to keep us awake and alert, to stem the natural tide of exhaustion, freed us from the circadian rhythms of our biology and so, along with the advent of artificial light, opened the frontier of night to the possibilities of work.
What coffee did for clerks and intellectuals, tea would soon do for the English working class. Indeed, it was tea from the East Indies – heavily sweetened with sugar from the West Indies – that fuelled the Industrial Revolution. We think of England as a tea culture, but coffee, initially the cheaper beverage by far, dominated at first.
Soon after the British East India Company began trading with China, cheap tea flooded England. A beverage that only the well-to-do could afford to drink in 1700 was by 1800 consumed by virtually everyone, from the society matron to the factory worker.

To supply this demand required an imperialist enterprise of enormous scale and brutality, especially after the British decided it would be more profitable to turn India, its colony, into a tea producer, than to buy tea from the Chinese. This required first stealing the secrets of tea production from the Chinese (a mission accomplished by the renowned Scots botanist and plant explorer Robert Fortune, disguised as a mandarin); seizing land from peasant farmers in Assam (where tea grew wild), and then forcing the farmers into servitude, picking tea leaves from dawn to dusk. The introduction of tea to the west was all about exploitation – the extraction of surplus value from labour, not only in its production in India, but in its consumption by the British as well.
Tea allowed the British working class to endure long shifts, brutal working conditions and more or less constant hunger; the caffeine helped quiet the hunger pangs, and the sugar in it became a crucial source of calories. (From a strictly nutritional standpoint, workers would have been better off sticking with beer.) The caffeine in tea helped create a new kind of worker, one better adapted to the rule of the machine. It is difficult to imagine an Industrial Revolution without it.

So how exactly does coffee, and caffeine more generally, make us more energetic, efficient and faster? How could this little molecule possibly supply the human body energy without calories? Could caffeine be the proverbial free lunch, or do we pay a price for the mental and physical energy – the alertness, focus and stamina – that caffeine gives us?
Alas, there is no free lunch. It turns out that caffeine only appears to give us energy. Caffeine works by blocking the action of adenosine, a molecule that gradually accumulates in the brain over the course of the day, preparing the body to rest. Caffeine molecules interfere with this process, keeping adenosine from doing its job – and keeping us feeling alert. But adenosine levels continue to rise, so that when the caffeine is eventually metabolised, the adenosine floods the body’s receptors and tiredness returns. So the energy that caffeine gives us is borrowed, in effect, and eventually the debt must be paid back.
For as long as people have been drinking coffee and tea, medical authorities have warned about the dangers of caffeine. But until now, caffeine has been cleared of the most serious charges against it. The current scientific consensus is more than reassuring – in fact, the research suggests that coffee and tea, far from being deleterious to our health, may offer some important benefits, as long as they aren’t consumed to excess. Regular coffee consumption is associated with a decreased risk of several cancers (including breast, prostate, colorectal and endometrial), cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, Parkinson’s disease, dementia and possibly depression and suicide. (Though high doses can produce nervousness and anxiety, and rates of suicide climb among those who drink eight or more cups a day.)
My review of the medical literature on coffee and tea made me wonder if my abstention might be compromising not only my mental function but my physical health, as well. However, that was before I spoke to Matt Walker.
An English neuroscientist on the faculty at University of California, Berkeley, Walker, author of Why We Sleep, is single-minded in his mission: to alert the world to an invisible public-health crisis, which is that we are not getting nearly enough sleep, the sleep we are getting is of poor quality, and a principal culprit in this crime against body and mind is caffeine. Caffeine itself might not be bad for you, but the sleep it’s stealing from you may have a price. According to Walker, research suggests that insufficient sleep may be a key factor in the development of Alzheimer’s disease, arteriosclerosis, stroke, heart failure, depression, anxiety, suicide and obesity. "The shorter you sleep," he bluntly concludes, "the shorter your lifespan."
Walker grew up in England drinking copious amounts of black tea, morning, noon and night. He no longer consumes caffeine, save for the small amounts in his occasional cup of decaf. In fact, none of the sleep researchers or experts on circadian rhythms I interviewed for this story use caffeine.
Walker explained that, for most people, the "quarter life" of caffeine is usually about 12 hours, meaning that 25% of the caffeine in a cup of coffee consumed at noon is still circulating in your brain when you go to bed at midnight. That could well be enough to completely wreck your deep sleep.
I thought of myself as a pretty good sleeper before I met Walker. At lunch he probed me about my sleep habits. I told him I usually get a solid seven hours, fall asleep easily, dream most nights.
"How many times a night do you wake up?" he asked. I’m up three or four times a night (usually to pee), but I almost always fall right back to sleep.
He nodded gravely. "That’s really not good, all those interruptions. Sleep quality is just as important as sleep quantity." The interruptions were undermining the amount of "deep" or "slow wave" sleep I was getting, something above and beyond the REM sleep I had always thought was the measure of a good night’s rest. But it seems that deep sleep is just as important to our health, and the amount we get tends to decline with age.
Caffeine is not the sole cause of our sleep crisis; screens, alcohol (which is as hard on REM sleep as caffeine is on deep sleep), pharmaceuticals, work schedules, noise and light pollution, and anxiety can all play a role in undermining both the duration and quality of our sleep. But here’s what’s uniquely insidious about caffeine: the drug is not only a leading cause of our sleep deprivation; it is also the principal tool we rely on to remedy the problem. Most of the caffeine consumed today is being used to compensate for the lousy sleep that caffeine causes – which means that caffeine is helping to hide from our awareness the very problem that caffeine creates.

The time came to wrap up my experiment in caffeine deprivation. I was eager to see what a body that had been innocent of caffeine for three months would experience when subjected to a couple of shots of espresso. I had thought long and hard about what kind of coffee I would get, and where. I opted for a "special", my local coffee shop’s term for a double-​shot espresso made with less steamed milk than a typical cappuccino; it’s more commonly known as a flat white.
My special was unbelievably good, a ringing reminder of what a poor counterfeit decaf is; here were whole dimensions and depths of flavour that I had completely forgotten about. Everything in my visual field seemed pleasantly italicised, filmic, and I wondered if all these people with their cardboard-sleeve-swaddled cups had any idea what a powerful drug they were sipping. But how could they?
They had long ago become habituated to caffeine, and were now using it for another purpose entirely. Baseline maintenance, that is, plus a welcome little lift. I felt lucky that this more powerful experience was available to me. This – along with the stellar sleeps – was the wonderful dividend of my investment in abstention.
And yet in a few days’ time I would be them, caffeine-tolerant and addicted all over again. I wondered: was there any way to preserve the power of this drug? Could I devise a new relationship with caffeine? Maybe treat it more like a psychedelic – say, something to be taken only on occasion, and with a greater degree of ceremony and intention. Maybe just drink coffee on Saturdays? Just the one.
When I got home I tackled my to-do list with unaccustomed fervour, harnessing the surge of energy – of focus! – coursing through me, and put it to good use. I compulsively cleared and decluttered – on the computer, in my closet, in the garden and the shed. I raked, I weeded, I put things in order, as if I were possessed. Whatever I focused on, I focused on zealously and single-mindedly.
Around noon, my compulsiveness began to subside, and I felt ready for a change of scene. I had yanked a few plants out of the vegetable garden that were not pulling their weight, and decided to go to the garden centre to buy some replacements. It was during the drive that I realised the true reason I was heading to this particular garden centre: it had this Airstream trailer parked out front that served really good espresso.